feat!: implement the new sysand index read protocol (#288)
sensmetry/sysand: docs/src/index-protocol.md

# Sysand Index Protocol

> **Status: v0, unversioned.** This document is not yet a stable contract.
> Breaking changes between sysand releases are expected until v1.

## 1. Scope

This document specifies the **sysand index** — the tree of files a sysand
index server exposes over HTTP for clients to read. It covers file layout,

> JSON shapes, discovery, and the verification rules clients use.

Reviewer: Only clients?

A _sysand index server_ is any service that hosts a sysand index. It MAY
additionally expose a _sysand index API_ (publish, yank, and other
management endpoints); that API is specified separately and is not covered
here.

> Keywords MUST, MUST NOT, SHOULD, MAY are used per RFC 2119.

Reviewer: REQUIRED is used but not listed, SHOULD is listed but not used.
I would suggest to just put the whole list of words here regardless of which are used so that we don't need to maintain this list as the document evolves

## 2. Implementability

A sysand index MUST be serveable from an ordinary HTTP static-file server.
There is no server-side computation requirement: every file listed below
corresponds to literal bytes on disk.

A smart server MAY respond to requests for `.project.json`, `.meta.json`,
or `project.kpar` with HTTP redirects (e.g. to an object store or CDN);

> clients MUST follow such redirects. The digest commitments in §10 provide

Reviewer: Add a link to section 10 (do so in other places too)

end-to-end integrity regardless of transport.

The `sysand index` CLI command group (in development) produces and
maintains index trees.

## 3. Discovery and configuration

The URL the user configures — the **index URL** in user-facing terms — is
the protocol's **discovery root**. It is not necessarily the root at which
index files are served.

On first contact, the client fetches:

```
<discovery-root>/.well-known/sysand-index.json
```

If present (HTTP 200), the response is a JSON object with these optional
fields:

```json
{
  "index_root": "https://sysand.org/index/",
  "api_root": "https://sysand.org/api/"
}
```

- `index_root` — base URL of the sysand index (where `index.json` lives).
  When absent, defaults to the discovery root.
- `api_root` — base URL of the sysand index API (where `v1/upload` and
  other endpoints live). When absent, defaults to the discovery root.

`index_root` and `api_root`, when present, MUST be absolute URLs

> (RFC 3986 §4.3: scheme + hier-part, no relative references). Clients

Reviewer: I would like to have links to the RFCs (or parts of them) which are referenced, e.g. https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3986.html#section-4.3 in this case

MUST reject a discovery document that supplies a relative URL for either
field rather than attempting to resolve it against the discovery root or
the final URL of the discovery-document fetch. Relative URLs have been
explicitly excluded in v0 to avoid ambiguity around the resolution base

> after redirects; a future version MAY relax this.

Reviewer: I would really prefer to keep it this way forever. I guess there is no harm in saying that a future version may relax this, I just don't think it's a good idea. Is there a sufficient reason any of us can think of for this to be allowed later?

If the well-known file is absent (HTTP 404) the client proceeds as though
it were present with no fields set: `index_root` and `api_root` both
default to the discovery root. Any other non-success response (e.g. 5xx)
is a hard error — the discovery attempt cannot be differentiated from a
broken server.

Clients MUST follow HTTP redirects on the discovery fetch. Unknown fields
in the document are silently ignored (see §13).

## 4. Layout

Anchored at `index_root`, a sysand index is a tree:

```
<index_root>/
├── index.json
├── _iri/
│   └── <sha256_hex(iri)>/
│       ├── versions.json
│       └── <version>/
│           ├── .project.json
│           ├── .meta.json
│           └── project.kpar
└── <publisher>/
    └── <name>/
        ├── versions.json
        └── <version>/
            ├── .project.json
            ├── .meta.json
            └── project.kpar
```

A project lives in exactly one of the two trees — `_iri/...` or
`<publisher>/<name>/...` — depending on its IRI shape (§5).

## 5. IRI → path resolution

Given a project IRI, clients resolve the project directory as follows:

> - If the IRI matches `pkg:sysand/<publisher>/<name>` and both segments

Reviewer: Is this something a user is expected to write when adding a new dependency to their project?
E.g. would they need to do `sysand add pkg:sysand/<publisher>/<name>`?

Author: Yes, until a convenience is added - see point 10 in https://github.com/sensmetry/sysand/issues/210.

  satisfy the canonicalization rules in §6, the project directory is
  `<index_root>/<publisher>/<name>/`.
- Otherwise, the project directory is
  `<index_root>/_iri/<sha256_hex(normalized_iri)>/`, where
  `sha256_hex(normalized_iri)` is the lowercase hex SHA-256 of the IRI
  after applying the normalization defined in §5.1.

A `pkg:sysand/` IRI that is not canonical (§6) MUST NOT be transparently
rerouted to the `_iri/...` path; clients MUST reject it.

### 5.1. IRI canonicalization for the `_iri` hash bucket

Before hashing, the IRI MUST be canonicalized by applying the following
steps in order. The intent is to delegate to well-specified external
algorithms so that any two implementations produce byte-identical output:

1. **Syntax-based normalization** — apply
   [`fluent_uri::Iri::normalize`][fluent-uri-normalize] semantics, which
   are equivalent to RFC 3986 §6.2.2 plus RFC 3987 §5.3.2 plus the

>    following commonly-used scheme-based adjustments:

Reviewer: I think "plus the following" is incorrect formulation.
This states

> <...> which are equivalent to <...> plus the following <...>

The function documentation states

> This is effectively equivalent to taking the following steps in order

   7. If the IRI has no authority and its path would start with `//`,
      prepend `/.` to the path.
2. **Host → Punycode** — if the authority host is a RegName containing
   non-ASCII characters, replace it with the result of
   [`domainToASCII`][whatwg-url-domain-to-ascii] (as implemented by the
   [`idna`][idna-crate] crate). IPv4/IPv6 literals are not affected.
3. **HTTP root path** — if the scheme is `http` or `https` and the path
   is empty, replace the empty path with `/`.

Two IRIs that yield the same byte sequence after steps 1–3 are the same
project for the purposes of this protocol; any other difference yields a
different project even if a scheme-specific interpretation would consider
them equivalent.

[fluent-uri-normalize]: https://docs.rs/fluent-uri/0.4.1/fluent_uri/struct.Iri.html#method.normalize
[rfc5952]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5952
[whatwg-url-domain-to-ascii]: https://url.spec.whatwg.org/#concept-domain-to-ascii
[idna-crate]: https://docs.rs/idna/

## 6. `pkg:sysand` canonicalization

A `pkg:sysand/<publisher>/<name>` IRI has exactly two slash-separated
segments after the `pkg:sysand/` prefix. Each segment MUST satisfy:

> - 3–50 ASCII characters in total.

Reviewer: What does "in total" here mean?

- Starts and ends with an ASCII alphanumeric character.
- Between the first and last character: ASCII alphanumeric characters,
  with isolated separators. No two separators may be adjacent.
- Allowed separators:
  - Publisher: space (` `) or hyphen (`-`).
  - Name: space, hyphen, or dot (`.`).

The **canonical form** of a segment is obtained by lowercasing ASCII
letters and replacing space characters with hyphens. An IRI stored in an
index or referenced by a client MUST already be in canonical form; a
non-canonical IRI (e.g. containing uppercase or spaces) MUST be rejected
rather than silently normalized.

## 7. `index.json`

Served at `<index_root>/index.json`. A flat enumeration of every project
IRI the index knows about:

```json
{
  "projects": [
    { "iri": "pkg:sysand/abc/def" },
    { "iri": "https://example.org/project.kpar" }
  ]
}
```

> - A 200 response with `"projects": []` is the "empty index" signal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A 200 response with `{ "projects": [] }` is the "empty index" signal.
```

- A 404 on `index.json` means "this URL is not a sysand index" — it MUST
  NOT be treated as an empty index. Clients surface it as a hard error so
  the resolver chain can skip this source rather than silently continue

>   against a misconfigured base URL.

Reviewer: This doesn't make sense to me. It seems that either clients surface that as a hard error, or the resolver chain skips this source, not both.

Author: I don't think the resolver chain should skip this source without a warning if seeing a 404 on index.json, but I think its fine if we opt to surface this is a hard error also, making things fail fully if you attempt a lookup against an index 404 on index.json --- its indicative of a misconfiguration worth erroring on in my mind.

Reviewer: I agree it should be surfaced as a hard error. My problem is with
> <...> so the resolver chain can skip this source <...>

Author: Resolved!

## 8. `versions.json`

Served at the project directory (§5). Lists every version of the project
along with the metadata a client needs to solve without fetching any
per-version file:

```json
{
  "versions": [
    {
      "version": "2.3.4",
      "usage": [
        { "resource": "pkg:sysand/abc/dep", "versionConstraint": "<2" }
      ],
      "project_digest": "sha256:<64-hex>",
      "kpar_size": 12345,
      "kpar_digest": "sha256:<64-hex>"
    }
  ]
}
```

Per-entry rules:

- All five fields (`version`, `usage`, `project_digest`, `kpar_size`,
  `kpar_digest`) are REQUIRED. A client MUST reject a `versions.json`
  that omits any of them.
- `version` MUST parse as a [semver 2.0.0][semver] version and MUST NOT

>   carry build metadata (the `+build…` suffix). Pre-release identifiers

Reviewer: Why not?

Author: If we have a clear reason to support it, we could try to establish a clear policy with it, but it would add significant complexity. Due to that, I made it explicitly not OK for now.

I made an update for clarification like below. This is how many registries does it.

- `version` MUST parse as a [semver 2.0.0][semver] version and MUST NOT
  carry build metadata (the `+build…` suffix). Pre-release identifiers
  (`-beta.1` etc.) are permitted. Build metadata is excluded because
  semver specifies that two versions differing only in their build
  metadata have equal precedence (semver §10); permitting it in the
  index would create two entries that sort identically but address
  different artifacts, breaking the `(iri, version)` identity contract
  (see [§13]).

---

AI when asked about registries support for version build metadata:

  - crates.io / Cargo: Rejects build metadata on publish. Cargo's semver parser accepts it, but the registry won't take a version with +build….                                                                                                                              
  - npm: Accepts build metadata syntactically, but since semver treats them as equal precedence, two such versions collide — npm therefore discourages it and tooling behavior is inconsistent.
  - PyPI: Not semver (PEP 440). Has a parallel concept — "local version identifiers" (+local) — which are explicitly forbidden on upload; only allowed for locally-built wheels.
  - Go modules: +incompatible is the one exception and it's a special-cased marker, not user-controlled build metadata. User-written +build in module versions is effectively not supported.
  - Maven Central: Not semver — uses its own version-comparison rules. N/A.

  protocol contract is malformed. Clients rely on this ordering directly
  and do not re-sort.

Duplicates:

- A `versions.json` that lists the same version twice is malformed. The
  client MUST reject it.

Absence:

- A project that legitimately has no published versions is represented
  by a 200 response with `"versions": []`. A 404 on `versions.json` is
  a server-side protocol violation — symmetric with the `index.json`
  rule in §7 and the per-version file rule in §9.
- Clients MUST surface the 404 to the user (e.g. as a warning) rather
  than treating it silently as "project has no versions"; the
  `(iri, 404)` case is a misconfigured mirror or a project that was
  never present in this index, and a silent fallback would hide the
  bug.
- Clients MAY continue querying other index sources in a
  resolver chain after a `versions.json` 404 from one source — the
  404 applies to that source, not to the IRI globally. A specific
  `get_project` call targeting a version whose `versions.json` 404s
  MUST hard-fail (there is nothing to validate the selection against).

[semver]: https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html

## 9. Per-version files

> Each version directory MUST contain all three files:

Reviewer: Say here that for each version there must be a directory named exactly like the version.

| --------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| **solve** | `versions.json`                                     |
| **lock**  | `versions.json` + `.project.json` + `.meta.json`    |
| **sync**  | `project.kpar` (starting from an existing lockfile) |

`sync` does not re-read `versions.json` or the per-version JSON files —
the lockfile already records the artifact's source URL, digests, and
everything else `sync` needs. Immutability (§11) is what makes this
safe: the lockfile's recorded `kpar_digest` is still the correct digest
to verify against when the `.kpar` is fetched.

## 10. Digests and canonicalization

### Wire format

Advertised digests (`project_digest`, `kpar_digest` in `versions.json`)
MUST use the form `sha256:<64 lowercase hex>`. Uppercase hex is invalid
on the wire. Other algorithms are reserved for future versions and MUST
NOT appear in v0 documents.

### `project_digest`

`project_digest` is SHA-256 over the canonical form of the `(info, meta)`
pair served at the same version directory. The canonical form is defined
such that it can be computed from the contents of `.project.json` and

> `.meta.json` alone, with no need to read `project.kpar` sources.

Reviewer: I don't think that's true, see https://github.com/sensmetry/sysand/blob/96bd0384feb02c5c470c6860a0c2ccdecc08383e/core/src/project/mod.rs#L223

Author: I think it holds true with the assumptions that the .meta.json is assumed to have valid checksum entries already. I updated the text, so it now reads as:

> `project_digest` is SHA-256 over the canonical form of the `(info, meta)`
pair served at the same version directory. Because the `meta.checksum`
rule above constrains `.meta.json` to carry SHA-256 per-file digests
directly, the canonical form of conforming index content can be
computed from `.project.json` and `.meta.json` alone, without reading
`project.kpar` sources.

### `kpar_digest`

`kpar_digest` is SHA-256 over the raw bytes of `project.kpar`.

### `meta.checksum` values

Per-source-file checksums inside `.meta.json` (`meta.checksum`) use raw
lowercase SHA-256 hex — no `sha256:` prefix, no algorithm selector. SHA-256

> is the only algorithm supported in v0.

Reviewer: I think this should also say that the `algorithm` specifier for each file should be `SHA256`

Author: Now reads as:

> Per-source-file checksums inside `.meta.json` (`meta.checksum`) are
`{ "value", "algorithm" }` pairs. In v0, `algorithm` MUST be `SHA256`
and `value` MUST be raw lowercase SHA-256 hex (no `sha256:` prefix).

## 11. Server obligations

A conforming sysand index server MUST uphold:

- **Tier consistency.** The fields advertised in a `versions.json` entry
  agree with the actual `.project.json`, `.meta.json`, and `project.kpar`
  served at that version's directory. The server is trusted as the source
  of truth for what a version contains; clients do not cross-check textual
  fields.
- **File presence.** Every version listed in `versions.json` has all
  three per-version files available for retrieval.
- **Immutability.** Once a version directory and its files exist, none of
  those bytes change — ever. Mechanisms for yanking, unlisting, or
  withdrawing a version are not specified in v0; they cannot be

>   implemented by mutating published bytes.

Reviewer: To my reading this doesn't address if the version directory can be removed at a later point. And I think we should allow that (so versions which somehow expose sensitive data, for example, could be removed)

Author: I don't want this relaxed, it is a key premise that versions don't just vanish. We can make yank have the files be deleted etc, but the version entry should stay and be marked as yanked or similar. But I have actively worked to make that out of scope to reduce the size of the things towards getting the essential pieces in place first.

If we consider this essential, let's block and require yanking before anyone sees this, but not as part of this PR!

Author: I'm making sure that we allow for removal of files, but not the versions.json entry. I'm ensuring both removal and yanking is possible one way or another.

  MUST NOT be installed.
- When it fetches either `.project.json` or `.meta.json`, MUST fetch both
  and MUST verify that their canonical `(info, meta)` digest equals the
  advertised `project_digest` before using either. A mismatch is a hard
  error.
- MUST reject any version whose advertised digest disagrees with computed
  content.
- Beyond the above, does not cross-check textual fields between
  `versions.json` and `.project.json` — the server is authoritative (§11).

## 13. Immutability and lockfile reproducibility

Immutability (§11) has a direct consequence for sysand lockfiles:

- The pair `(iri, version)` is a stable identifier for a specific set of
  bytes; a lockfile referencing it is valid indefinitely against a
  conforming index.
- Digest fields recorded in a lockfile (`project_digest`, `kpar_digest`)
  provide a tripwire: a later fetch whose advertised digest differs from
  the lockfile's recorded digest indicates that either the server
  violated immutability, or the lockfile and server refer to different
  indices.

Yank/unlist semantics — a way to mark a version unavailable for new
solves while leaving existing lockfiles working — are intentionally not

> specified in v0.

Reviewer: I think we should specify some way to remove a version in v0 too - if some version accidentally exposes sensitive information, for example, it there should be a simple way for the package author to remove it.

Author: https://github.com/sensmetry/sysand/pull/288#discussion_r3132662573 I opinionated against letting this PR do more, but not against implementing yanking before this is public. To specify how to yank etc is also out of scope of this PR in my mind.

Author: I'm providing a strategy to yank and remove, and how it fits with versions.json. I'll add a comment about this and ping you.

## 14. Forward compatibility

- Unknown fields in any JSON document are silently ignored. Servers MAY
  add fields without breaking existing clients; clients MUST NOT reject a
  document solely because it contains an unfamiliar field.
- There is no schema-version signal in v0. When one is introduced it
  will live in a single designated place, not duplicated across
  documents.
- Breaking changes to this protocol are expected before v1.

> ## 15. `sysand index` CLI (preview)

Reviewer: It should be stated somewhere that `sysand index` and `sysand client` have less strict quality checks then sysand server and `sysand publish` commands (and have exact differences listed).
Not sure if that's in scope for the current PR though.

Author: There is the index-api-protocol.md file that isn't written out fully, which is what `sysand publish`, hmm...

I figure there isn't a definitive sysand index server - just the official one with misc details out of scope to discuss in this project, there is only the sysand index protocol (index-protocol.md) and various sysand index server api (index-api-protocol.md).

I'd like to not try to declare that definitively as part of this PR, but I agree that once written out in full, it is relevant to clarify what is supported with `sysand publish`.

  `"available"`. Servers SHOULD omit the field when its value would be
  `"available"` to save space. Clients MUST
  accept both the omitted form and an explicit `"available"` as
  equivalent. `yanked` and `removed` entries are collectively
  "retired"; see [§11] for the server obligations they impose and
  [§12] for client behaviour.

Ordering:

- Entries MUST appear in descending order of parsed semver precedence
  (newest-first).

Duplicates:

- `versions.json` MUST NOT list the same version twice.

Absence:

- A `versions.json` 404 means the project is not in this index.
  Clients query indexes by IRI without first consulting
  `index.json`, and each index hosts only some IRIs, so a 404 here
  is the ordinary "look elsewhere" signal — not a protocol
  violation. A client MUST treat the 404 as "not in this index";
  in a resolver chain it continues to the next source, and the
  operation fails only when no source returns a usable `versions.json`
  and no source returns a hard error. Non-404 errors remain hard
  errors. This applies to `get_project` as well: a 404 on that
  project's `versions.json` reports "not in this index" to the direct

>   caller, who decides whether that is fatal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A `versions.json` 404 means the project is not in this index.
```

  error. A lockfile `sync` starts from the recorded archive URL and
  digest and does not re-read `versions.json`, so a removed archive may
  surface as an archive-fetch failure instead. In that case the client
  SHOULD fetch `versions.json` to check the reason for removal and
  present more actionable information to the user.

The protocol is designed so that each client operation fetches only what
it needs:

| Operation | Needs from the index                                |
| --------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| **solve** | `versions.json`                                     |
| **lock**  | `versions.json` + `.project.json` + `.meta.json`    |
| **sync**  | `project.kpar` (starting from an existing lockfile) |

`sync` does not re-read `versions.json` or the per-version JSON files, as
per-version files are immutable and the lockfile already records everything
`sync` needs to download the archive and verify it.

## 10. Digests and canonicalization

### Wire format

Advertised digests (`project_digest`, `kpar_digest` in `versions.json`)
MUST use the form `sha256:<64 lowercase hex>`. Uppercase hex is invalid

> on the wire.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Advertised digests (`project_digest`, `kpar_digest` in `versions.json`)
MUST use the form `sha256:<64 lowercase hex>`.
```

  with the same bytes forever or withdrawn (see retirement, below).
- **Version persistence.** `versions.json`'s `versions` entries are retained:
  once an entry exists it is never removed, and its
  `version`, `usage`, `project_digest`, `kpar_size`, and `kpar_digest`
  fields never change.
- **Version retirement.** The only mutable field on an existing
  `versions.json` `versions` entry is `status` ([§8]). Permitted transitions
  are `available → yanked`, `available → removed`, and `yanked → removed`; no
  other transitions are permitted (in particular, no un-yank). `removed` is
  terminal, and moving a version to `removed` requires withdrawing its
  per-version files ([§9]).
- **Well-formed archives.** The full set of criteria for a well-formed
  archive is not frozen in v0 and is expected to evolve alongside the
  `sysand index` CLI (see [§15]).

## 12. Client obligations

A conforming sysand index client:

- Follows HTTP redirects on every index resource.
- MUST verify the streamed body of `project.kpar` against the advertised
  `kpar_digest` during download. In case of mismatch the archive MUST NOT
  be used.

> - When it fetches either `.project.json` or `.meta.json`, MUST fetch both
>   and MUST verify that their canonical `(info, meta)` digest equals the
>   advertised `project_digest` before using either. A mismatch is a hard
>   error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When it fetches either `.project.json` or `.meta.json`, MUST fetch both
  and MUST verify that their canonical `(info, meta)` digest equals the
  advertised `project_digest` before using either.
```

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if verifying canonical checksum should be required or even expected. If the kpar digest matches what the server says, verifying the canonical checksum is extra work, and serves only to catch server bugs/inconsistency.

Author: What the client should do on mismatch isn't obvious if we remove this, so I figure its better retained.

Author: We are currently doing it, and performance of this is a non-issue in my mind, so I think we should stick with hard-erroring trusting that we do this, as it simplifies thinking about the system as a whole. I recall there was a comment you just modified that referenced us leaning on this verification.

# Sysand Index Protocol

> **Status: v0, unversioned.** This document is not yet a stable contract.
> Breaking changes between sysand releases are expected until v1.

## 1. Scope

> 

Reviewer 2: Not sure where, but we should specify that authentication is out of scope.

Author: I'll add it alongside the simple file-server part, as it follows from that.

Author: Ended up adding it here.

This document specifies the **sysand index** — the tree of files a sysand
index server exposes over HTTP. It covers file layout, JSON shapes,
discovery, the obligations an index server must uphold (§11), and the
verification rules clients apply (§12).

A _sysand index server_ is any service that hosts a sysand index. It MAY
additionally expose a _sysand index API_ (publish, yank, and other
management endpoints); that API is specified separately in the
[sysand index API protocol](index-api-protocol.md) and is not covered here.

The keywords MUST, MUST NOT, REQUIRED, SHALL, SHALL NOT, SHOULD, SHOULD
NOT, RECOMMENDED, MAY, and OPTIONAL are to be interpreted as described in
[RFC 2119][rfc2119].

## 2. Implementability

> A sysand index MUST be serveable from an ordinary HTTP static-file server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A sysand index can be served from an ordinary HTTP static-file server.
```
This is a document of the actual protocol, not the requirements for such a protocol.

Author: I agree that this claim is a requirement for the protocol, but the requirement is also describing it in a very effective way. I'd like to retain this language as I find it a key insight to understanding it and maintaining the protocol as it evolves over time.

There is no server-side computation requirement: every file listed below

> corresponds to literal bytes on disk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A sysand index MUST be serveable from an ordinary HTTP static-file server,
i.e. there are no server-side computation requirements and files can be
served as-is from disk.
```

}
```

- `index_root` — base URL of the sysand index (where `index.json` lives).
  When absent, defaults to the discovery root.
- `api_root` — base URL of the sysand index API (where `v1/upload` and
  other endpoints live). When absent, defaults to the discovery root.

`index_root` and `api_root`, when present, MUST be absolute `http` or
`https` URLs ([RFC 3986 §4.3][rfc3986-43]: scheme + hier-part, no
relative references) and MUST NOT contain URL userinfo (`username` or
`password`). Clients MUST reject a discovery document that supplies a
relative URL or userinfo for either field rather than attempting to
resolve it against the discovery root or the final URL of the
discovery-document fetch — relative URLs are excluded to avoid ambiguity
around the resolution base after redirects, and userinfo is excluded so
credentials are not logged, persisted, or propagated through generated
source URLs.

If the discovery document is absent (HTTP 404) the client proceeds as
though it were present with no fields set: `index_root` and `api_root`
both default to the discovery root. Any other non-success response (e.g.
5xx) is a hard error — the discovery attempt cannot be differentiated

> from a broken server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5xx) is a hard error.
```

## 4. Layout

Anchored at `index_root`, a sysand index is a tree:

```
<index_root>/
├── index.json
├── _iri/
│   └── <sha256_hex(normalized_iri)>/
│       ├── versions.json
│       └── <version>/
│           ├── .project.json
│           ├── .meta.json
│           └── project.kpar
└── <publisher>/
    └── <name>/
        ├── versions.json
        └── <version>/
            ├── .project.json
            ├── .meta.json
            └── project.kpar
```

A project lives in exactly one of the two trees — `_iri/...` or
`<publisher>/<name>/...` — depending on its IRI shape
([§5]).

## 5. IRI → path resolution

Given a project IRI, clients resolve the project directory as follows:

- If the IRI matches `pkg:sysand/<publisher>/<name>` and both segments
  satisfy the canonicalization rules in
  [§6], the project directory is
  `<index_root>/<publisher>/<name>/`.
- Otherwise, the project directory is
  `<index_root>/_iri/<sha256_hex(normalized_iri)>/`, where
  `sha256_hex(normalized_iri)` is the lowercase hex SHA-256 of the IRI
  after applying the normalization defined in
  [§5.1].

A `pkg:sysand/` IRI that is not canonical
([§6]) MUST NOT be transparently rerouted

> to the `_iri/...` path; clients MUST reject it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clients MUST reject `pkg:sysand/` IRIs that are not canonical
([§6]).
```

### 5.1. IRI canonicalization for the `_iri` hash bucket

Before hashing, the IRI MUST be canonicalized by applying the following
steps in order. The intent is to delegate to well-specified external

> algorithms so that any two implementations produce byte-identical output:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
steps in order. The intent is to produce identical hashes for all URLs that
are canonically equivalent, i.e. refer to the same resource:
```

1. **Syntax-based normalization** — apply
   [`fluent_uri::Iri::normalize`][fluent-uri-normalize] semantics. This
   delegates syntax-based IRI normalization, including percent-encoding,
   case, port, dot-segment, and IPv6 literal handling, to `fluent-uri`.
2. **Host → Punycode** — if the authority host is a
   [registered name][rfc3986-reg-name] (a domain-name-like host) containing
   non-ASCII characters, replace it with the result of
   [`domainToASCII`][whatwg-url-domain-to-ascii] (as implemented by the

>    [`idna`][idna-crate] crate). IPv4/IPv6 literals are not affected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   [`domainToASCII`][whatwg-url-domain-to-ascii]. IPv4/IPv6 literals are not affected.
```
Let's refer to the standards where possible. Divergence from the standard in any specific implementation is a bug.

3. **HTTP root path** — if the scheme is `http` or `https` and the path

>    is empty, replace the empty path with `/`.

Reviewer 2: Link to https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9110#section-4.2.3

Two IRIs that yield the same byte sequence after steps 1–3 are the same
project for the purposes of this protocol; any other difference yields a
different project even if a scheme-specific interpretation would consider
them equivalent.

## 6. `pkg:sysand` canonicalization

> A `pkg:sysand/<publisher>/<name>` value is both a PURL and an IRI. In the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A `pkg:sysand/<publisher>/<name>` value is a PURL. In the
```
Also link to https://packageurl.org/

Reviewer 2: PURL is a URL which is an URI which is an IRI.

index protocol it MUST already be canonical and has exactly two
slash-separated segments after the `pkg:sysand/` prefix. Each segment MUST
satisfy:

- Length: 3–50 ASCII characters.
- Starts and ends with an ASCII lowercase letter or digit.
- Between the first and last character: ASCII lowercase letters, digits,
  and isolated separators. No two separators may be adjacent.
- Allowed separators:
  - Publisher: hyphen (`-`).
  - Name: hyphen or dot (`.`).

Project metadata is allowed to start from non-IRI `publisher` and `name`
values when constructing a `pkg:sysand` PURL: lowercase ASCII letters and
replace spaces with hyphens before forming the PURL. Once the PURL/IRI

> exists, no further normalization is permitted. An IRI stored in an index

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
replace spaces with hyphens before forming the PURL. Once constructed, the PURL
is canonical and no further normalization is done. An IRI stored in an index
```

or referenced by a client MUST be canonical; a non-canonical IRI (e.g.
containing uppercase or spaces) MUST be rejected rather than silently

> normalized.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
containing uppercase or spaces) MUST be rejected.
```

> normalized.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## 6. Sysand PURL relation to canonicalization

Sysand PURL (TODO: link to https://packageurl.org/) is of the form `pkg:sysand/<publisher>/<name>`. It is intended
to identify projects in a consistent way. In the index
protocol, no other standard PURL components (version/build) are permitted.
Publisher and name are of the form:

- Length: 3–50 ASCII characters.
- Starts and ends with an ASCII lowercase letter or digit.
- Between the first and last character: ASCII lowercase letters, digits,
  and isolated separators. No two separators may be adjacent.
- Allowed separators:
  - Publisher: hyphen (`-`).
  - Name: hyphen or dot (`.`).

PURL will be used to identify all projects whose `publisher`
and `name` each satisfy:

- Length: 3–50 ASCII characters.
- Starts and ends with an ASCII letter or digit.
- Between the first and last character: ASCII letters, digits,
  and isolated separators. No two separators may be adjacent.
- Allowed separators:
  - Publisher: hyphen (`-`) or space.
  - Name: hyphen, space or dot (`.`).

To create the PURL, publisher and name are normalized by lowercasing
and replacing spaces with hyphens.

Once a PURL is created, it is considered canonical and no further
normalization is done. Any Sysand PURL not satisfying the Sysand PURL rules
above is considered invalid and must be rejected without any further
processing.
```

Author: > Once a PURL is created, it is considered canonical and no further
normalization is done. Any **Sysand** PURL not satisfying the Sysand PURL rules
above is considered invalid and must be rejected without any further
processing.

We don't need to reject all other PURLs, right? They are just some IRI.

Reviewer 2: Yup, anything outside `pkg:sysand` falls under generic IRI rules and normalization.

## 7. `index.json`

Served at `<index_root>/index.json`. A flat enumeration of every project
IRI the index knows about:

```json
{
  "projects": [
    { "iri": "pkg:sysand/abc/def" },
    { "iri": "https://example.org/project.kpar" }
  ]
}
```

Today, clients use `index.json` when enumerating every IRI an index
advertises through `ReadEnvironment::uris` / `uris_async`. Resolving a
specific IRI does not consult `index.json`; it fetches that project's
`versions.json` directly ([§8]).

A 404 on `index.json` is a hard error for operations that fetch it:
`{ "projects": [] }` is the empty-index signal, so a 404 means "this URL

> is not a sysand index".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An empty index has `index.json` that contains `{ "projects": [] }`.

A 404 on `index.json` is a hard error, i.e. the URL is assumed to not
point to an index.
```

## 8. `versions.json`

Served at the project directory ([§5]). Lists every version of the project
along with the metadata a client needs to solve without fetching any
per-version file:

```json
{
  "versions": [
    {
      "version": "2.3.4",
      "usage": [
        { "resource": "pkg:sysand/abc/dep", "versionConstraint": "<2" }
      ],
      "project_digest": "sha256:<64-hex>",
      "kpar_size": 12345,
      "kpar_digest": "sha256:<64-hex>"
    }
  ]
}
```

Per-entry rules:

- All five fields (`version`, `usage`, `project_digest`, `kpar_size`,
  `kpar_digest`) are REQUIRED. A client MUST reject a `versions.json`
  that omits any of them.
- `version` MUST parse as a [semver 2.0.0][semver] version and MUST NOT

>   carry build metadata (the `+build…` suffix). Pre-release identifiers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  carry build metadata (`+<something>`). Pre-release identifiers
```

  (`-beta.1` etc.) are permitted. Build metadata is excluded because
  semver specifies that two versions differing only in their build
  metadata have equal precedence (semver §10); permitting it in the
  index would create two entries that sort identically but address
  different artifacts, breaking the `(iri, version)` identity contract
  (see [§13]).
- `usage` is an array of dependency declarations in the same shape as in
  `.project.json`. It is the solver's authoritative input.
- `project_digest` and `kpar_digest` are lowercase SHA-256 in
  `sha256:<64-hex>` form ([§10]).
- `kpar_size` is the byte length of the archive.
- `status` is OPTIONAL. When present, it MUST be one of `"available"`,

>   `"yanked"`, or `"removed"`; an omitted `status` is equivalent to
>   `"available"`. Servers SHOULD omit the field when its value would be
>   `"available"`, so unretired entries keep their on-wire shape
>   unchanged from indexes predating the retirement model; clients MUST
>   accept both the omitted form and an explicit `"available"` as
>   equivalent. `yanked` and `removed` entries are collectively
>   "retired"; see [§11] for the server obligations they impose and
>   [§12] for client behaviour.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `status` is OPTIONAL. When present, it MUST be one of `"available"`,
  `"yanked"`, or `"removed"`; an omitted `status` is equivalent to
  `"available"`. Servers SHOULD omit the field when its value would be
  `"available"` to save space. Clients MUST
  accept both the omitted form and an explicit `"available"` as
  equivalent. `yanked` and `removed` entries are collectively
  "retired"; see [§11] for the server obligations they impose and
  [§12] for client behaviour.
```

Ordering:

- Entries MUST appear in descending order of parsed semver precedence
  (newest-first). Clients MUST validate the ordering at ingest and MUST
  reject a `versions.json` that violates it, for the same reason they
  reject missing fields and duplicates — a document that contradicts the
  protocol contract is malformed. Clients rely on this ordering directly

>   and do not re-sort.

Reviewer 2: Clients either re-sort to validate or they don't. I think:

```suggestion
- Entries MUST appear in descending order of parsed semver precedence
  (newest-first).
```
Also, what about pre-releases? E.g. `2.0.0-alpha1 > 1.0.0` according to semver rules. Probably the best way would be for the client to skip any pre-releases that are at the start of the list.

Reviewer 2: Since we already mandate the server to have versions in descending order, no need to make client check that. Garbage in, garbage out with regards to the index.
Client may of course still choose to do extra validation and reject non-compliant files.

Reviewer 2: To make this extra clear, `clients MAY reject any files that do not comply with this protocol` somewhere at the start, but I don't think it's necessary.

Duplicates:

- A `versions.json` that lists the same version twice is malformed. The

>   client MUST reject it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `versions.json` MUST NOT list the same version twice.
```
No need to place extra work on the client.

  Clients query indexes by IRI without first consulting
  `index.json`, and each index hosts only some IRIs, so a 404 here
  is the ordinary "look elsewhere" signal — not a protocol
  violation. A client MUST treat the 404 as "not in this index";
  in a resolver chain it continues to the next source, and the
  operation fails only when no source returns a usable `versions.json`
  and no source returns a hard error. Non-404 errors remain hard
  errors. This applies to `get_project` as well: a 404 on that
  project's `versions.json` reports "not in this index" to the direct
  caller, who decides whether that is fatal.
- A project that the index lists in `index.json` but for which no
  version has been published is represented by a 200 response with
  `{ "versions": [] }`. Servers MUST serve a `versions.json` for
  every project listed in `index.json` ([§11]); the 404 case
  therefore corresponds to a project the index does not list.

## 9. Per-version files

Each version in `versions.json` has a subdirectory under the project
directory ([§4]) whose name is byte-identical to the entry's `version`
field (e.g. `0.3.0/`, `10.0.0-beta.1/`). That directory MUST contain

> all three files:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
field (e.g. `0.3.0/`, `10.0.0-beta.1/`). That directory MUST contain:
```

- `.project.json` — interchange project info.
- `.meta.json` — interchange project metadata.
- `project.kpar` — the archive.

A version's file presence is governed by its [§8] `status`:

- `available` and `yanked` — all three files MUST be retrievable;
  a 404 on any of them is a hard error. Clients MUST NOT treat the
  404 as "version not available"; `status` is the only mechanism for

>   signalling unavailability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `available` and `yanked` — all three files MUST be present. Clients
  MUST NOT treat the 404 as "version not available"; `status` is the
  only mechanism for signalling unavailability.
```
But a 404 _does_ indicate that the version is not available.

Author: For any version entry in versions.json where status was available/yanked, a 404 when fetching a .meta.json or .project.json etc (as done during lock directly after solve) should be a hard error rather than a signal to rethink.

Author: ```suggestion
- `available` and `yanked` — all three files MUST be retrievable;
  a 404 on any of them is a hard error.
```

Reviewer 2: Yes. I meant that if we fetch the per-version file directly and get a 404, the client should be able to conclude that the version is not available. Of course if version is indicated as not-removed in `versions.json`, it must have its files present.

- `removed` — the three files MUST 404. A client that has just read the
  corresponding `versions.json` entry MUST reject the version before
  fetching these files and surface it as a distinct removed-upstream
  error (typical phrasing: "version X was removed upstream"). A lockfile
  `sync` replay is different: it starts from the recorded archive URL and
  digest and does not re-read `versions.json`, so a removed archive may

>   surface as an archive-fetch failure instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `removed` — all three files MUST 404. A client that has just read the
  corresponding `versions.json` entry MUST reject the version before
  fetching these files and surface it as a distinct removed-upstream
  error. A lockfile `sync` starts from the recorded archive URL and
  digest and does not re-read `versions.json`, so a removed archive may
  surface as an archive-fetch failure instead. In that case the client
  SHOULD fetch `versions.json` to check the reason for removal and
  present more actionable information to the user.
```

The protocol is designed so that each client operation fetches only what
it needs:

| Operation | Needs from the index                                |
| --------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| **solve** | `versions.json`                                     |
| **lock**  | `versions.json` + `.project.json` + `.meta.json`    |
| **sync**  | `project.kpar` (starting from an existing lockfile) |

`sync` does not re-read `versions.json` or the per-version JSON files —
the lockfile already records the artifact's source URL, digests, and
everything else `sync` needs. Immutability ([§11]) is what makes this
safe: the lockfile's recorded `kpar_digest` is still the correct digest

> to verify against when the `.kpar` is fetched.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`sync` does not re-read `versions.json` or the per-version JSON files, as
per-version files are immutable and the lockfile already records everything
`sync` needs to download the archive and verify it.
```

## 10. Digests and canonicalization

### Wire format

Advertised digests (`project_digest`, `kpar_digest` in `versions.json`)
MUST use the form `sha256:<64 lowercase hex>`. Uppercase hex is invalid
on the wire.

### `project_digest`

`project_digest` is SHA-256 over the canonical form of the `(info, meta)`
pair served at the same version directory. Because the `meta.checksum`
rule below constrains `.meta.json` to carry SHA-256 per-file digests
directly, the canonical form of conforming index content can be
computed from `.project.json` and `.meta.json` alone, without reading

> `project.kpar` sources.

Reviewer 2: We must decide whether to use the scheme proposed in https://github.com/sensmetry/sysand/issues/289 or some other well-specified scheme; currently this is unclear.

Author: I frame it as we can decide to act on #289 or not, but I don't want this to be blocking this PR.

Reviewer 2: It can wait, but must happen before next release, as it's a breaking change. Either way, we will have to specify what and how is hashed precisely.

### `kpar_digest`

`kpar_digest` is SHA-256 over the raw bytes of `project.kpar`.

### `meta.checksum` values

Per-source-file checksums inside `.meta.json` (`meta.checksum`) are
`{ "value", "algorithm" }` pairs. In v0, `algorithm` MUST be `SHA256`

> and `value` MUST be raw lowercase SHA-256 hex (no `sha256:` prefix).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### `meta.checksum` values

Per-source-file checksums inside `.meta.json` (`meta.checksum`) are
`{ "value", "algorithm" }` pairs. In v0, `algorithm` MUST be `SHA256`
and `value` MUST consist of lowercase hex digits.
```
Any further than this and we'll be duplicating KerML spec.

## 11. Server obligations

A conforming sysand index server MUST uphold:

> - **Tier consistency.** The fields advertised in a `versions.json` entry

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Data consistency.** The fields advertised in a `versions.json` entry
```

  agree with the actual `.project.json`, `.meta.json`, and `project.kpar`
  served at that version's directory. The server is trusted as the source
  of truth for what a version contains; clients do not cross-check textual

>   fields.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  served at that version's directory.
```
Be more concise. If we mandate it, clients can assume it to be true.

- **`versions.json` presence.** Every project listed in
  `index.json` has a `versions.json` retrievable at its project
  directory ([§5]). A project not listed in `index.json` MAY
  return 404 for `versions.json`; clients interpret that 404 as

>   "not in this index" ([§8]).

Reviewer 2: Why `MAY`? I'd say that both `index.json` and per-project `versions.json` serve as indicators and sources of truth, and their presence/absence is significant. E.g. to check if a project is in the index, a client may do `HEAD project/versions.json` and act accordingly.

Author: Fully agree, index.json should be indicative of all versions.json files, and anything else is a mismatch. I'll update this and mark as resolved once I do.

- **File presence.** Every version listed in `versions.json` with
  `status` other than `removed` has all three per-version files
  available for retrieval.
- **Byte immutability.** Existing per-version files never have their
  bytes changed in place; a published `project.kpar` is either served
  with the same bytes forever or withdrawn (see retirement, below).
- **Retirement via `status`.** `versions.json` entries are retained:
  once an entry exists it is never removed, and its
  `version`, `usage`, `project_digest`, `kpar_size`, and `kpar_digest`
  fields never change. The only mutable field on an existing entry is
  `status` ([§8]). Permitted transitions are `available → yanked`,
  `available → removed`, and `yanked → removed`; no other transitions
  are permitted in v0 (in particular, no un-yank). `removed` is
  terminal, and moving a version to `removed` requires withdrawing

>   its per-version files ([§9]).

Reviewer 2: What about deleting a project from existence (removing from `index.json` and removing all versions + `versions.json`)? It's not mentioned here, so I'd assume it's allowed (and it should be; this is what package registries generally do for malicious packages). Although then we must consider deleting + re-publishing the same package, which breaks assumptions about version immutability...

Reviewer 2: Though if all versions of the package are malicious, there is no reason to keep even its metadata... Let's see how other package managers deal with this first.

Author: 👍 we need to think about this
- yes we should support deleting full projects, the new index already does btw
- i think it should mean deleting all data files, but what about the metadata? There is complexity stemming from retaining it and blocking re-creation, and from deleting it.

Author: I created https://github.com/sensmetry/sysand/issues/309 to track this, marking this as resolved for now.

- **Well-formed archives.** The full set of criteria for a well-formed
  archive is not frozen in v0 and is expected to evolve alongside the
  `sysand index` CLI; see [§15] for the division between wire-level

>   enforcement and publish-time project-quality checks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Well-formed archives.** The full set of criteria for a well-formed
  archive is not frozen in v0 and is expected to evolve alongside the
  `sysand index` CLI (see [§15]).
```

Reviewer 2: Don't specify implementation details; it's up to the client to implement whatever checks it desires before publishing, and section 15 does not mention the constraints that are not already specified in this document and thus assumed known.

Reviewer 2: In particular, more interesting constraints are on how the zip is sanitized (no symlinks, exec bits, binary files, etc.). But we should specify somewhere here what constraints are put on the zip that the server may serve, e.g. that the project must be at the root of the kpar.

## 12. Client obligations

A conforming sysand index client:

- Follows HTTP redirects on every index resource.
- MUST verify the streamed body of `project.kpar` against the advertised
  `kpar_digest` during download. A mismatch is a hard error; the archive

>   MUST NOT be installed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- MUST verify the streamed body of `project.kpar` against the advertised
  `kpar_digest` during download. In case of mismatch the archive MUST NOT
  be used.
```

- When it fetches either `.project.json` or `.meta.json`, MUST fetch both
  and MUST verify that their canonical `(info, meta)` digest equals the
  advertised `project_digest` before using either. A mismatch is a hard
  error.
- MUST NOT select a version whose [§8] `status` is not `"available"`
  for a new resolution. This applies to operations that consult
  `versions.json` to pick a version (solve, lock); `sync` replays a
  lockfile's pinned `(iri, version)` without re-solving and is
  unaffected by `status`.
- Beyond the above, does not cross-check textual fields between
  `versions.json` and `.project.json` — the server is authoritative

>   ([§11]).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Beyond the above, does not cross-check textual fields between
  `versions.json` and `.project.json` ([§11]).
```

## 13. Immutability and lockfile reproducibility

Byte immutability and retained `versions.json` entries ([§11]) have
direct consequences for sysand lockfiles:

- The pair `(iri, version)` is a stable identifier for a specific set of
  bytes; a lockfile referencing it stays valid against a conforming
  index for as long as the entry's `status` is not `"removed"`
  ([§8]).
- The `project_digest` and `kpar_digest` values advertised in
  `versions.json` are captured in a lockfile as a tripwire: a later
  fetch whose advertised digest differs from the lockfile's recorded
  digest indicates that either the server violated byte immutability, or

>   the lockfile and server refer to different indices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `project_digest` and `kpar_digest` values advertised in
  `versions.json` are captured in a lockfile to detect any changes
  when downloading it later.
```

Retirement ([§8] `status`) and the lockfile contract:

- A `yanked` entry is fully compatible with existing lockfiles — the
  files are still served, the digests still match. Only _new_

>   resolutions are affected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A `yanked` entry is fully compatible with existing lockfiles, as the
  original files are still served. Only new resolutions are affected.
```

- A `removed` entry breaks `sync` for any lockfile that pins it; the
  lockfile's recorded digests still serve as a tripwire, but `sync`
  does not re-read `versions.json`. The failure therefore surfaces from
  the archive fetch or digest verification path rather than from the

>   entry's `status`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A `removed` entry breaks `sync` for any lockfile that pins it, as the
  project files for that version are no longer present in the server.
```

## 14. Forward compatibility

- Unknown fields in any JSON document are silently ignored. Servers MAY
  add fields without breaking existing clients; clients MUST NOT reject a

>   document solely because it contains an unfamiliar field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Unknown fields in any JSON document MUST be ignored by the clients. Clients
  MAY still choose to inform the user of such changes.
```

- There is no schema-version signal in v0. When one is introduced it
  will live in a single designated place, not duplicated across

>   documents.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Protocol version is not explicitly provided anywhere currently.
```
We can't be sure if and where we will include the version, and that promise would be inconsequential for current clients anyway.

- Breaking changes to this protocol are expected before v1.

## 15. `sysand index` CLI (preview)

The `sysand index` command group produces and maintains a sysand index
tree: laying out files, generating digests, and keeping
`versions.json` consistent with the per-version artifacts. This is the
only supported path for creating and mutating an index tree —
third-party tooling may serve a tree that happens to conform, but the
project does not support creation or maintenance by means other than

> `sysand index`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`versions.json` consistent with the per-version artifacts. This is the
only supported path for creating and mutating an index tree.
```
This is already clear enough; the protocol/index can be implemented by any other tools and there is no need to specifically discourage it.

The `sysand index` CLI enforces the wire-level rules this document

> defines — tier consistency, digest agreement, `meta.checksum` format,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
defines — data consistency, digest agreement, `meta.checksum` format,
```

> `pkg:sysand` canonicalization, `versions.json` ordering and uniqueness.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
This just rewords the lines above

Sysand index clients enforce their client obligations ([§12]), including
digest verification but not textual cross-checks between tiers. Semantic
project-quality checks (is `.meta.json`'s `checksum` map complete, does
the archive shape match the interchange spec, are referenced files
reachable, etc.) are the publish pipeline's responsibility: tooling
built on top of the protocol (e.g. `sysand publish` and a sysand index

> server's upload handler) SHOULD enforce those at the publish boundary.

Reviewer 2: I see no reason to keep this, as it just repeats info from elsewhere.
